Registry Draft v2 (#76)
purescript/registry: README.md

# RFC: PureScript Registry

## Problem at hand

PureScript needs a way to distribute packages. We used to rely on the Bower registry for that, but [this is not possible anymore](https://discourse.purescript.org/t/the-bower-registry-is-no-longer-accepting-package-submissions/1103).

## Goals for a PureScript package registry

Here's a non-comprehensive list of desiderable properties/goals that we'd generally like to
achieve when talking of a PureScript registry, and that we think this design covers:
- **independent**: we're coming from a situation when relying on a third party registry has
  faulted us, so we'd need something that we can control and possibly host ourselves.

> - **immutabile**: published packages are immutable - once a version has been published

Reviewer: Small typo: immutabile -> immutable

Author: More like "accidental Italian" :smile:
Thanks for the catch!

- to minimize the attack surface we will use a __pull model__ where all sources are fetched by our CI rather than having authors upload them. In practice this means that all the registry operations will run on the CI infrastructure of this repo.

This repo will contain:
- CI workflows that run the Registry operations
- the source for all this CI
- all the issues/pull-requests that trigger CI operations that affect the Registry
- metadata about packages, such as the list of maintainers, published versions, hashes of the archives, etc.
- the package-sets

All of the above is about metadata, while the real data (i.e. the package tarballs)
will live on various [storage backends](#Storage-Backends).

## The Package `Manifest`

A `Manifest` stores all the metadata (e.g. package name, version, dependencies, etc)
for **a specific  version** of **a specific package**.

Packages are expected to version in their sources a `purs.json` file, that conforms
to the [`Manifest` schema](./v1/Manifest.dhall) to ensure __forwards-compatibility__
with future schemas.

> This means that new clients will be able to read old schemas, but not viceversa.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that new clients will be able to read old schemas, but not vice-versa.
```

> And the reason why forward (rathen than backwards) compatibility is needed is because

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And the reason why forward (rather than backwards) compatibility is needed is because
```

package manifests are baked in the (immutable) package tarballs forever, which means that
any client (especially old ones) should always be able to read that manifest.

> This means that the only changes allowed to the schema are:

Reviewer 2: Is it possible to "deprecate" a field by replacing it with a new one, with tools using the new one but falling back to the old one?

Author: That could theoretically work, but the reason why we have to leave old fields in is so that old clients will be able to read them (as they cannot rely on new fields). In this sense we'll never be able to stop writing data to the old fields, so I guess the answer to your question is "not really". Makes sense?

Every target can have its own dependencies, source globs, etc.

> By convention a package needs to have at least one target called `lib`.

Reviewer 2: Is this part just enforced by CI? Or is there any reason to make `TargetType` either a) `Lib` (with an enforced "src/**/*.purs" source) or b) some other target?

Author: I envisioned this as being just a CI check, but we could do something fancier as well here.
Right now the Dhall types are fairly basic, because there are some constraints on their values, which need to:
1. have a decent JSON representation
2. make it easy to guarantee forwards-compatibility

- optionally add the package to the [next Package Set](#Package-Sets)
- upload the package documentation to [Pursuit](https://pursuit.purescript.org)

The CI will post updates in the issue as it runs the various operations, and close the issue
once all the above operations have completed correctly.

Once the issue has been closed the package can be considered __published__.

### Publishing a new version of an existing package

It is largely the same process as above, with the main difference being that the body of the created issue will
conform to the schema of an [`Update`](./v1/Operation.dhall).

### Unpublishing a package/release

Unpublishing a version for a package can be done by creating an issue containing JSON
conforming to the schema of an [`Unpublish`](./v1/Operation.dhall).

CI will verify that _all_ the following conditions hold:
- the author of the issue is either one of the maintainers or one of the [Registry Trustees](#Registry-Trustees)
- the version is less than __1 week old__

If these conditions hold, then CI will:
- move that package version from `published` to `unpublished` in the package `Metadata`
- delete that package version from the storages

> Unpublishing is allowed for security reasons (e.g. if some package was taken over maliciously),

Reviewer 3: Malicious code poses a risk to anyone using the registry and so I think we should always remove malicious code once we become aware of it, no matter how much time has passed. The possibility of malicious code ending up in the registry also makes me wonder if we might want to seek legal advice and put together a proper terms of service document, saying things like "you acknowledge that not all of the code in the registry has been vetted at that whenever you download and use code from the registry you do so at your own risk".

Author: 1. I agree on allowing us to remove malicious code in any case, but in that case we'd become judges of "what's malicious"? I think a good policy could be "something that has a [CVE](https://cve.mitre.org/) assigned", but that might be too strict as PureScript packages might not be considered "common". We could get in touch with them to coordinate on this though, they are supposed to be _very_ responsive by definition :slightly_smiling_face: 
2. I also agree on having some legalese that discharges us of responsibility of what we host, but I wonder how NPM does this?

Reviewer 3: I think what counts as malicious needs to be based on the trustees' judgement. I don't think "has a CVE assigned" would work, because CVEs are for vulnerabilities, many of which are not malicious, and also as I understand it it's not too hard to get a CVE assigned for a vulnerability. I think it's quite rare than an accidental vulnerability should result in a package being taken down from the registry, because it's likely that a large chunk of the users of any given library aren't using it in such a way that the vulnerability affects them, or are using it in a context where security isn't a concern. For example, this vulnerability probably wouldn't be worth breaking people's builds over, since it's rare than an attacker controls the HTTP request method: https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2020-26116

Author: I see, yeah. I went looking for NPM's policy on this, and it looks like [they consider "malicious code" as "unacceptable content"](https://www.npmjs.com/policies/open-source-terms#acceptable-content), so I think we could go for this as well.

Moreover, I pretty much agree with all [their legal policies](https://www.npmjs.com/policies/) as I think it's pretty sensible stuff (the ones I read at least). So we could have a read at them and just adopt the ones we like without even having to talk with a lawyer (and talk with one whenever we want to diverge from there)

Author: Opened #79 to track this

but it's allowed only for a set period of time because of the `leftpad` problem (i.e. breaking everyone's builds).

Exceptions to this rule are legal concerns (e.g. DMCA takedown requests) for which Trustees might have to remove packages at any time.

## Package metadata

Every package will have its own file in the `packages` folder of this repo.

You can see the schema of this file [here](./v1/Metadata.dhall), and the main reasons for this file to exist are to track:
- the upstream location for the sources of the package
- published versions and the SHA256 for their tarball as computed by [our CI](#Adding-a-new-package).
  Note: these are going to be sorted in ascending order according to [SemVer](https://semver.org) - when in

>   doubt the sorting provided by [the `semver` package on NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/package/semver#comparison) is correct.

Reviewer 3: I don't think there's a need to refer to the `semver` package on npm, is there? The spec tells you how to sort versions unambiguously in all cases except for when the versions have the same major, minor, patch, and prerelease data, but their build metadata differs. However, I think this case should not come up, as the registry should not accept a package submission whose version is the same as an already-uploaded version in all respects except for the build metadata.

Author: The keyword here is "when in doubt". The bottom line here is that we go by the standard, but in practice our CI will use the NPM package (which is the main implementation of the standard anyways), so I thought it was useful to refer to that here so that in case of inconsistencies it would be easy to verify if the problem is in the standard, in this implementation or in other implementations.

- unpublished versions together with the reason for unpublishing

> - GitHub handles of package maintainers, so that we'll be able to contact them if any action is needed for any of their packages

Reviewer 3: Is there a missing word here? "GitHub handles of package maintainers"

Author: Would "GitHub usernames of package maintainers" sound better?

Tangent: I thought about putting email addresses in there, but I am not sure about having them in clear in this way. On the other hand, other registries do it as well.

Reviewer 3: Ohh, I see what you mean, I thought "handles" was being used as a verb lol. Yeah, I think "usernames" would avoid that confusion at least.

Author: Fixed!

which allows a maintainer to tell a solver not to consider a particular version any more when constructing build plans.
You can find [a great comparison between the two here](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/gf7uw8/on_pvp_and_restrictive_bounds/fpv3dtg/)
illustrating the reason why we support revisions here.

Trustees will have to work under a set of constraints so that their activity will not cause disruption, unreproducible builds, etc.
They will also strive to involve maintainers in this process as much as possible while being friendly, helpful, and respectful.
In general, trustees aim to empower and educate maintainers about the tools at their disposal to better manage their own packages.
Being a part of this curation process is entirely optional and can be opted-out from.

Trustees will try to contact the maintainer of a package for __4 weeks__ before publishing a new revision, except if the author
has opted out from this process, in which case they won't do anything.

Trustees will __not__ change the source of a package, but only its metadata in the `Manifest` file.

> Trustees are allowed to publish __new revisions__ (i.e. versions that bump the `pre-release` segment from SemVer), to:

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure using the semver prerelease segment will work so well for this. Firstly, prerelease versions are considered less than non-prerelease versions according to semver, so v1.0.0 compares greater than v1.0.0-r1. Secondly, doesn't this prevent package authors from using the prerelease segment for their own purposes? I wouldn't really mind if we reserved the prerelease segment for our own use, but in that case we would be diverging from semver (if we don't allow authors to use all of the components of semver, we aren't really using semver) so I think we ought to be more upfront about that if that's what we go with.

Author: Great points. I wouldn't like us to diverge from SemVer, but other than that I have no strong opinion on how to do this.
Do you have a concrete idea that we could write down here?

Reviewer 3: I just looked over the semver spec again and it does say that prerelease identifiers and build metadata are optional so actually I take that back, we are well within our right to only accept what the spec describes as "normal" versions into the registry (i.e. those which don't have prerelease identifiers or build metadata), and since it's quite rare to use prerelease identifiers and build metadata in practice (at least for libraries), I think it may even be a good idea to reject versions which use them. I also think it would be nice to set the registry architecture up so that it's impossible for revisions to affect anything other than the package metadata. What Hackage do is handle revisions of metadata for a version separately from the version tarball itself, so that there's only ever one tarball for a version, and revisions of the metadata are stored separately. It then becomes the job of the registry client to fetch the most recent version of the metadata alongside the package tarball. That approach sounds sensible to me, and I think it suggests that metadata revisions are separate from package versions. So maybe this is just a question for the package index?

Author: I am not quite comfortable with Hackage's approach of storing package sources and metadata revisions separately, as I think it has a couple of problems:
1. there is only one tarball for a version, which means that "hashing the package sources" doesn't guarantee integrity and security by itself, as you'd need to fetch a metadata file as well, and you'd need to guarantee integrity (i.e. hash it and distribute the hashes) either of this file or of the whole bundle. In the latter case, one then also needs to define how to compose the files to compute the hash. Preserving integrity of the metadata as well is necessary because things like "changing version bounds" could introduce malicious code if not supervised, and not guaranteeing integrity for them would mean that people would get them in their build believing that the version hasn't changed (because the hash did not), rendering builds nondeterministic and insecure.
2. doing this would mean that the `registry-index` repo would become a source of truth, which means that we'd either have to maintain these two repos in sync (e.g. the moment we add metadata in there we also need to sync the list of versions here, etc) or unify them
3. ...but would storing metadata in here mean that packages wouldn't version that? If metadata is not stored alongside the package sources, then there would be no way to use a package without going through the Registry (and I can see some people not wanting to do that because of security or other company concerns), as they'd have to figure out how the package is defining dependencies, bounds, etc. If we store the metadata alongside the sources instead, then we have the question of "which metadata is correct, the one here or the one in the registry?". This last reason alone is why the current design ditches this aspect (i.e. storing manifests in here and optionally in packages) from the previous draft.

About prerelease identifiers: some packages have been using the pre-release segment (e.g. [Halogen](https://github.com/purescript-halogen/purescript-halogen/releases/tag/v5.0.0-rc.9) or [aff](https://github.com/purescript-contrib/purescript-aff/releases/tag/v4.0.0-rc.6)) and I think it's good to allow them to, as it has an important role in package versioning.

I also read again through the SemVer spec, and found an issue which might actually help us here: it looks like it considers two version with everything equal but the _build metadata_ as equals in the sorting. I.e. it ignores _build metadata_ when sorting. This is a problem for us because we _need_ get a stable sorting of releases (to figure out the last version of a package), so we would either have to:
- disallow releases with _build metadata_ altogether
- or reserve the _build metadata_ segment _only_ for Trustees to cut new revisions (so going back to that idea from the previous version of the draft), and expand the sorting so that it would consider version with build metadata as "later" than without. The ordering of different build metadata segments should be no problem, as the spec already defines how to sort prerelease segments, and their grammar is the same, so we could just reuse that.
  This behaviour seems to be what `apt` does as well - distros patch upstream packages and add build metadata so that the package manager picks the patched versions as newer - and I think it works very well there

Note that both of the above options means that we'll slightly diverge from SemVer, but I'd consider this quite fine, since it's basically just getting rid of undefined behaviour.

Reviewer 3: 1. Aren't we intending to provide access to individual package manifest files without downloading a whole package tarball anyway, via the package index? Ensuring the integrity of those package manifest files is already a problem we'll need to deal with, surely?
2. In that case, could we store package manifest files in the storage backend alongside the package tarballs and call that the source of truth for them? Then, the package index would always be derived from the storage backend, and would not be a source of truth?
3. I think disallowing build metadata makes sense. We could also require that each package may only upload one version with the same major, minor, patch, and prerelease components. For example, if you've already uploaded `1.0.0+abc`, then I think the registry should reject a subsequent upload of `1.0.0+def`. I think defining an ordering for the build metadata would be a more serious violation of the semver spec, because the spec specifically says that you mustn't do that. If we go against this, I think it is likely to cause funny behaviour in clients which implement the semver spec accurately: for example, you couldn't have versions `1.0.0+abc` and `1.0.0+def` in a Set together. The only way I can make sense of the build metadata ordering requirement from the semver spec is if package registries should be refusing package uploads which differ from an existing version only in the build metadata component, i.e. uploading two different versions with the same major, minor, patch, and prerelease components should be disallowed.

Author: How would Trustees publish revisions if we disallow build metadata? And why would sorting by that a "serious violation"? Clients are supposed to implement a spec that we define here. If we say "it's SemVer plus ordering by build metadata", then that is the spec.

Reviewer 3: By treating revisions as a separate thing from package versions? It’s a more serious violation in my mind because it’s not just filling a gap in the spec, it’s going against something the spec explicitly says. The versioning libraries that exist aren’t “semver plus build metadata,” they’re just semver.

Author: Opened #80 to track this, let's move over there
